INTO THE WAITING NIGHT
Welcome, reader, to Stars Without Number, a science
fiction role-playing game. Within the pages of this
book you will find all that you require to forge mighty
tales both of victory and bitter defeat amid the silent
stars above. You will fashion heroes fit for this new
age of exploration and rediscovery, men and women
capable of unearthing the lost wonders of humanity’s
fallen empire. The scattered sectors of the old Terran
Mandate have been out of communication for centuries, and no one living can know all the strange wonders that have been born in the Silence. Every fresh
world is a new marvel to discover, and the brave souls
willing to repair the broken web of contact can expect
rich rewards for their efforts.
Stars Without Number is not only a game of discovery, however. There are adventures to be had in more
familiar places as well. New polities and young empires
have sprung up in the centuries since the collapse of the
Terran Mandate, and they struggle with each other as
hotly as their technology and resources allow. The right
hero at the right time can shift the fate of worlds, and
heroes willing to fight for their beliefs can be the greatest resources a struggling star nation possesses. There
are adventures to be had in dealing with the powers
of a stellar sector, where men and women are needed
to foil the sinister plans of enemies and bring victory.
Not every hero has a mind for high goals, however. Many desire nothing more than freedom and the
credits to enjoy it. Whether hauling cargo to backwater
worlds or selling their lasers to the highest bidder, these
mercenary adventurers go where the pay is good and
the danger is acceptable. Some have greater ideals than
their next patron’s pay, while others have no devotion
to anything but their own interest. Stars Without Number has room for both kinds of heroes, and tools to help
a game master provide the adventures they require.

A Word to Newbies
If Stars Without Number is your first tabletop
role-playing game, you’re a rare soul. Most of
the readers of this book will already be familiar
with the hobby, but fear not; tabletop RPGs aren’t
hard to understand. Just think of them as a pencil-and-paper equivalent of a computer RPG, with
a “game master” or “GM” in place of the computer,
and 2-5 players playing “player character” avatars.
You’ll need paper, pencils, and a set of polyhedral dice or a dice app to play the game. You
can get gaming dice online easily. When the book
tells you to roll “2d10+1”, for example, it means
to roll two ten-sided dice and add them together,
then add one to the result. “d00” means to roll two
10-sided dice and read them as ones and tens.

Stars Without Number is above all a set of tools
for players and game masters bent on sci-fi adventure.
While the setting is built to provide a wide scope for
daring deeds, the game is fundamentally meant to be
reshaped and refocused to suit your particular interests
and desires. Whether a gritty game of desperate mercenary gunmen in an interstellar war zone or a dashing
campaign of star-faring adventurers in a space-operatic
sector, the game is meant to fit the needs and tone of
your desired play.
Stars Without Number belongs to the “old-school
renaissance” trend in gaming, and draws much of its
mechanical inspiration from the classic games of the
seventies and the work of such authors as Gary Gygax,
Tom Moldvay, Zeb Cook, Marc Miller, and other luminaries of those days. While many people now prefer
different mechanical frameworks for their play, these
“old-school” rules are understood by a tremendous
number of gamers and form a convenient lingua franca
between many different OSR games. These games are
usually broadly compatible with each other, and allow
players to loot material from many different authors
and time periods with limited effort at conversion.
This game is also designed to be a “sandbox game”,
one built to ease the creation of active, living campaign
worlds where the PCs aren’t the only important figures,
and where a hero doesn’t necessarily have any narrative
armor against failure and death. While it can certainly
be played in a more conventional adventure path or
story-arc manner, Stars Without Number is stocked
with a wide range of tools, techniques, and guidelines
for easing sandbox play. The surprise and freshness
inherent in a good sandbox game can be a refreshing
change of pace for many groups, and in this book you’ll
find what you need to play in that style.
The book you hold in hand right now is the revised edition of the original 2010 version of the game.
In compiling the revision, I have been careful to keep it
compatible with the existing material for the game, so
you should be able to use original edition supplements
with minimal fuss. Rather than changing the bones of
the system, I have instead added additional material to
help GMs and entertain players, expanding the scope
of the game. If you are reading the free PDF version of
this game, you will find everything you need for a full
campaign in these pages. If you have the deluxe version
in hand, you will find almost a hundred pages of bonus
content to supply you with tools for transhuman scifi campaigns, space-operatic heroes, stellar wizardry,
mechs, artificial intelligences, and tools for building
sci-fi societies.
Above all, Stars Without Number is your game now.
There is no one “correct” way to play it. There is only
your way to play it, and you should feel free to make it
the game you want to play.

CHARACTER CREATION
Before you can begin playing Stars Without Number,
you need to roll up a character. While the game can
theoretically work with just a single player and a GM,
things work best with 2–5 friends in addition to the
GM. A lone adventurer can get in a lot of trouble out
there, and a small group can find it hard to include all
the different skills and talents that are often required
to survive a sticky situation.
With that in mind, you and the others in your
gaming group should give a little thought to making
characters that work well together. Grim loners make
good book protagonists, but they don’t survive well
when there’s no author around to bail them out.
When making a character, some players like to
simply throw the dice and see where they lead. Others
prefer to know a little more about the game world and
like to have more detail provided beforehand about the
worlds and themes of the game. For those who’d prefer
a more detailed discussion of the world of Stars Without
Number, you can skip ahead to page 120 and read up on
it there. For the rest of you…

What Players Need To Know

Your character is an adventurer in the year 3200, a
dweller among the scattered worlds of a great human
diaspora. For whatever reason, he or she has decided
to leave their old life behind and take up a starfaring
existence, daring perils and seeking new frontiers in
search of glory, riches, or their own personal ambitions.
Many worlds have recovered from the desperation of the centuries-long Silence, and can once again
manufacture spacecraft and other advanced technology.
Other worlds are “lost worlds”, still cut off from interstellar trade and forced to make do with the resources
of their own planet. Lostworlders are often considered
barbaric by technologically advanced worlds.
Tramp freighters, small merchant ships, and scout
craft serve most worlds, even the most backward. If
your character comes from a primitive or isolated culture, it’s probable that he or she hitched a ride aboard
such a ship to travel to a more cosmopolitan life. It may
or may not have been a voluntary choice.
In actual play, your character should be motivated
to act, and to act as part of a group. The game does
not deal well with hostile loners, apathetic brooders, or
other characters that have to be coaxed into engaging
with the world and cooperating with the rest of the
group. The world of Stars Without Number is dangerous, and characters who cringe from peril or insist on
facing it alone will find only boredom or an early grave.
Every character should have a goal from the very
start. This might be something as simple as “become
wealthy beyond my fondest dreams of avarice” or “be
known as the greatest pilot in the sector”. It might be
as elaborate as “engineer the downfall of the interstellar

empire that conquered my world”. Whatever it is, it
should give your character an immediate reason to go
out and do something.
This will to act is especially crucial in Stars Without Number, because this game is designed to support
a “sandbox” style of gaming. Unlike many other games
that encourage the development of a particular story
or the playing out of a specific plot line, Stars Without
Number presents an entire interstellar sector to your
characters and invites you to choose for yourself how
to experience it. Stories will arise based on what your
characters do and how they respond to the adventure
situations provided by the GM.
As a player, you need to cooperate with your GM.
This doesn’t necessarily mean following every lead and
hook you’re given without demurral, but it does mean
that you need to respond to the situations and possibilities that are given to you.
You also need to keep in mind that your adventurers exist in a very large world that is not scaled to
your characters’ abilities. If you insist on throwing your
characters into situations or challenges that seem overwhelming, the odds are that they will overwhelm you.
Scouting, reconnaissance, and careful intelligence gathering will help you recognize no-win situations before
you push ahead into them. By the same token, don’t
hesitate to flee if your party appears to be facing certain
doom. A keen sense of when to decamp the field is
often an experienced adventurer’s most valuable asset.

Rolling a Character
Stars Without Number belongs to a somewhat older
tradition in tabletop RPGs, one where characters
aren’t so much “built” as they are “rolled”. Players
often don’t know who exactly they’re going to be
playing in a campaign, and rely on random rolls to
determine a hero’s aptitudes and skills. Part of the
pleasure of the game is throwing these new-rolled
cyphers into play and exploring their personalities
and motivations directly through the events of the
adventures they undertake.
In most modern games, however, a player
expects to be able to create exactly the kind of PC
they’ve envisioned before the campaign begins.
They don’t want to rely on random rolls to give
them the character they’re going to be playing.
This is a perfectly valid preference, and players who want to have full control over creating
their hero can do so with an attribute array and
skills picked from a selected background. Even
so, players without strong feelings on the matter
might find it refreshing to let their hero’s past be
discovered by the unpredictable chance of the dice.

4• Summary of Character Creation

A Summary of Character Creation
For your convenience, here’s a quick summary of the
character creation process. Experienced players can
simply go down the list to generate their next interstellar freebooter, while those new to the game can use it as
a guide reference as they go through the steps detailed
on the following pages. A blank character sheet can be
found at the end of the book.
Note that some steps indicate that you should roll
or pick skills, as described on page 7. The first time you
roll or pick a skill, it starts at level-0. The second time,
it becomes level-1. The third time, you can instead pick
any other non-psychic skill of your choice that’s less
than level-1. No novice hero’s skills can exceed level-1
during character creation.
1.

Roll your six attributes or assign them from an
array, using Strength, Dexterity, Constitution,
Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma. Attributes
reflect the basic potential of your hero. Roll 3d6
six times and assign them in order, or use an
array of 14, 12, 11, 10, 9, 7 assigned as you wish.
If you randomly roll your scores you may then
pick one attribute to change to a score of 14.

2.

Mark down your attribute modifiers for each
score. When rolling dice that are affected by an
attribute, you don’t apply the whole score; instead, you apply the attribute modifier. A score
of 3 is a -2, 4—7 is a -1, 8—13 is no modifier,
14—17 is +1, and 18 is +2.

3.

Pick a background from the list on page 9, one
that most closely reflects your hero’s past experiences. You gain the skill listed under the
background name at level-0, which equates to
an ordinary working knowledge of it.

4.

Decide whether to roll for additional skills or
pick them. If you pick skills, you can choose two
more skills from the Learning table for your
background, with the exception of entries that
say “Any Skill”, which you may not pick. You
cannot pick entries from the Growth table. If
you’re not sure what to pick, just take the “Quick
Skills” listed for your background at level-0,
which include your background’s beginning skill.

5.

If you choose to roll for your skills, you can roll up
to three times, dividing up your rolls between
the Growth and Learning tables as you wish.
When you roll on the Growth table, some results may say “+2 Physical” or “+2 Mental”. In
the former case, you can add two points to either Strength, Dexterity, or Constitution, or one
point to two different stats. In the latter case,

you can add two points to either Intelligence,
Wisdom, or Charisma, or divide the bonus between two of them.
6.

Choose your class, representing those talents
you have that are most relevant to an adventurer’s lifestyle. If your hero isn’t well-described
by Warrior, Expert, or Psychic, you can choose
Adventurer and mix your class abilities.

7.

Choose your foci, representing the side talents
or particular specializations of your hero. You
can pick one level of a focus of your choice.
Characters with the Expert class or the Partial
Expert feature of the Adventurer class get one
level of a non-combat, non-psychic focus for
free in addition to this. They can spend both
levels on the same focus, starting with level 2
in it if they wish. Characters with the Warrior
class or Partial Warrior feature of the Adventurer class can do the same in choosing one level of
a combat focus.

8.

Optionally, if your GM is allowing alien PCs or
VI or True AI PCs, you can make your character
into one such creature by spending your focus
level on the appropriate origin focus. Aliens and
VIs are described in the Xenobestiary chapter,
starting on page 192, while True AIs are part
of the deluxe Stars Without Number core book,
starting on page 280.

9.

Now pick one non-psychic skill of your choice to
reflect your hero’s outside interests, natural talents, hobby expertise, or other personal focus.

10.

If you’ve chosen the Psychic class or chosen to be
an Adventurer with the Partial Psychic ability,
you are a psychic PC, with powers described
in the following section, starting on page 28.
Psychics can pick two psychic skills from those
listed on page 8, while Partial Psychics can pick
one. If a Psychic picks the same skill twice, they
get it at level-1 expertise, and can pick a free
level-1 technique from those listed for that discipline. Both Psychics and Partial Psychics get
the level-0 abilities associated with their skills,
as described under each discipline they possess.
Both also have a maximum Effort score equal to
1 plus their highest psychic skill plus the better of
their Wisdom or Constitution modifiers.

11.

Roll your maximum hit points on 1d6, adding
your Constitution modifier. Even a penalty can’t
reduce your hit points below 1. Warrior PCs

